Upcoming Changes in MAME

<p>We’re well on our way through the current development cycle, and
MAME 0.237 is going to have some significant changes, not just in terms
of emulation, but in the user interface and debugger.  Don’t worry, no
functionality has been removed.  In fact, we’ve added several features.
It just might take a little while to adjust to the differences.</p>

<p>First of all, we’ve added support for localised system name files, as
used by front-ends like Retrofire, MxUI and MAME Plus!  Popular files
include mame32j.lst (Japanese) and mame_cn.lst (Chinese).  You’ll be
able to put your preferred system name file in the DATs (or “history”)
folder, and select it in MAME’s UI customisation settings menu.  UI
localisation support is more complete, and MAME 0.237 will include
high-quality Chinese and Greek translations, thanks to YuiFAN and
BraiNKilleRGR.</p>

<p>Mouse/trackball navigation has been improved (you can even click DIP
switches to toggle them), and the system and software selection menus
have been tweaked to include more information and make better use of
space.</p>

<p>Lots of debugger commands have been enhanced to work better with
newer memory system features.  We’ve also updated and expanded the
debugger documentation, both <a
href="https://docs.mamedev.org/debugger/">on our web site</a> and for
the built-in <tt>help</tt> command.</p>

<p>If you’re compiling MAME yourself, Python 2.7 will no longer be
supported: compiling MAME now requires Python 3.2 or later (this won’t
affect you if you just use MAME, Python isn’t required to run MAME).
Most operating systems have included Python 3 for years, and our <a
href="https://www.mamedev.org/tools/">MSYS64/MinGW build tools for
Windows</a> already include Python 3.8 – as long as you have a
<tt>python3</tt> command, you should be good to go.</p>

<p>Read on for a more complete list of changes.</p>

<!--more-->

<h3>General UI changes</h3>

<p>Settings in menus can be changed by clicking the left/right
arrows.</p>

<p>DIP switches can be toggled by clicking the DIP switch display below
the menu.</p>

<p>We’ve made the headings in the full-size info viewer clickable.</p>

<h3>System and software selection menus</h3>

<p>The info panel on the right now includes the name for systems, or the
description, software list/item, and all info from the software list for
software.  We’ve Added support for finding software items by alternate
title, and added developer, distributor, author and programmer filters
for software.</p>

<p>There’s now an option to use to file manager to select media for
systems that require media to be mounted.</p>

<p>We’ve moved the option to return to the previous menu or exit from
the menu to the right of the toolbar (use the UI cancel input if you
aren’t using a pointing device), and moved the plugin selection option
off the system selection menu to the settings menu.  We’ve removed the
short name (or ROM set) for systems, the description for software, and
the software list/item for software favourites from the info box below
the menu (this info is all in the info panel on the right).  This frees
up three lines for systems/software items.</p>

<p>We’ve added a toolbar button to audit system ROMs/disk images
(magnifying glass), and allowed selecting whether to audit media for all
systems or only unavailable systems from the confirmation menu,
eliminating the need for one input.  It’s now possible to cancel an
audit, and auditing can use multiple CPU cores.</p>

<h3>Debugger</h3>

<p>Memory access syntax in expressions has been extended to support
arbitrary address spaces and tags relative to the current CPU.</p>

<p>Memory, watchpoint and cheat commands have been extended to work
with arbitrary address address spaces.  This is an incompatible change
for a number of commands that previously accepted a CPU parameter.  The
device and/or address space are now supplied as a suffix on the
address.</p>

<p>Breakpoints and watchpoints can now be set for CPUs other than the
CPU currently visible in the debugger by adding a device suffix to the
address.  The commands for clearing, disabling and enabling breakpoints,
watchpoints and registerpoints can now take multiple arguments to
operate on more than one breakpoint/watchpoint/registerpoint at a time.
The commands for listing breakpoints, watchpoints and registerpoints now
accept an optional argument to list
breakpoints/watchpoints/registerpoints for a single CPU.</p>

<p>The history command now shows visited instructions in order from
least recently visited to most recently visited.</p>

<p>The Windows, Qt and macOS debuggers have a new option to show
registerpoints in breakpoints/watchpoints windows.</p>
